Osteomyelitis in Rabbits - Fred's Story

By sharing the story of my beloved brown mottled dwarf lop eared rabbit, Fred, I hope to make bunny owners more aware of the bone disease, osteomyelitis, the prognosis when first diagnosed, and its long-term consequences.

Osteomyelitis is said to be a form of bone cancer in rabbits. In a nut-shell, it is an abscess appearing as a hard lump in the jawbone. There may be more than one, usually in the mandible, though the lumps can appear anywhere on the head.

It is though to be hereditary, but I personally remain skeptical about that fact, in that it is actually of a bacterial nature.

It is important to carry out weekly health checks on your rabbits. Rabbits, being prey animals, are very adept in concealing signs of illness, often until it is too late. Therefore, one must be extra vigilante in looking out for any abnormality, unusual behaviour, loss of appetite and weight.

Your rabbit should feel symmetrical on both sides, the front teeth should be nicely aligned - malocclusion can often occur at any stage of a rabbit's life, so look out for that. He should be bright with a good appetite, with no signs of dribbling from the mouth or discharge from the eyes. The latter could well be an indication of the onset of dental problems.

Fred was born in September 2002. He was a loving and affectionate rabbit, and he shared his short life with a spayed doe called Wendy. They were truly a couple, looking out for each other, licking each other's faces and there was always perfect harmony between them.

I first noticed a lump in Fred's lower jaw in March 2004. It started off to be about the size of a large pea, but rapidly progressed to the size of a small marble.

A couple of months before that, I noticed that he had developed reverse occlusion of his incisors, so I began trimming them to the correct size every couple of weeks. Rabbits teeth grow 2-4mm per week.

I took him along to my vet and x-rays confirmed my fear, that it was indeed osteomylitis. I had read about this bone disease and knew that it would be the start of extensive veterinary treatment with ongoing problems.

Veterinary surgeons differ in their opinions and methods of tackling osteomylitis. Some vets carry out radical invasive surgery, by actually going into the bone and draining the pus and then putting the patient on antibiotics. This method is usually temporary. It invariably reoccurs, often in other places in the jaw or anywhere on the head. My vet agreed that this sort of invasive surgery would be futile, and that it would be better to put him on a six week course of Baytril and see where we go from there. Baytril is a safe and generally a very well tolerated antibiotic by rabbits, though it can have limited effects of abscesses that occur in soft tissue, bearing mind that rabbit pus is as thick as toothpaste, making it difficult for antibiotics to get through to the abscess capsule. Baytril is also the least harmful antibiotic to the gut flora in the rabbit. Some rabbits who have a severe form of the condition can have Baytril every day for the rest of their lives to keep it in check. Once osteomylitis is diagnosed, I'm afraid it most often means that the bunny is not going to make old bones. One thing seems to lead to another, which I'll explain later in this article. The advice everyone gave me was to enjoy him whilst he still has some quality of life.

Fred was prescribed a long course of Baytril and it did seem to considerably reduce the swelling in the jaw. My vet seemed convinced that the infection was now under control, but said that Fred would always have residual swelling in that area. This swelling was still quite big though. A few months later, he developed a swelling on the other side of his jaw. Baytril did seem to arrest the infection, but he was now left with swellings on both sides of the mandible. I still continued to trim his incisors every two to three weeks, but in time, I noticed that he was having difficulty in chewing his food, his jaw would make strange circular movements whilst chewing and he began to ignore even his favourite vegetables. This was an obvious sign of overgrown molars. The problem with his molars became apparent six months after he was first diagnosed with osteomylitis. Though I could manage to clip his incisors, I did not have big enough gags to enable me to clip his molars, so that meant another trip to the vet.

The vet put Fred under a general anaesthetic. He extracted three of the mandibular molars. I was told that one of the molars had just fragmented, in other words, it just crumbled away, so in effect, he had permanently lost four of his molars. His back teeth were severely overgrown, and had caused ulcers and abrasions to his cheeks and tongue. Whilst Fred was under, the vet took a good look at his jaw lumps and said that the infection in the bone had gone, but he would always be left with residual swelling.

Fred was sent home with more Baytril to ward off further infection.

After the operation, Fred did seem happier and his chewing seemed normal. He even began eating carrots again. He ate and drank normally for several months after his back teeth had been done.

In spite of his eating and drinking normally, I noticed that over time he began to lose weight.

I also noticed that Fred’s droppings were much very strange. Some were normal in shape and size, but others were very large, and contained particles of undigested food. His normal diet consisted of hay, alfalfa, a small handful of commercial rabbit mix, greens and hard vegetables and fresh water. Changing his rabbit mix to Supa Rabbit Excel, which is an all-in-one mix made no difference and he continued to pass irregular droppings. He did, however seem to be eating his caecotrophs. These are the soft, shiny and pungent first-pass droppings which rabbits consume almost immediately after passing. Like guinea pigs, rabbits are also coprophagic. The word coprophagic means literally to eat own faeces.

Though, like guinea pigs, it is only the first pass faeces that are eaten and which go through the digestive system again, to be passed as hard pellets. Other than weight loss, Fred seemed his frisky self. When I’d trim his incisors, he would let me slip a finger into his mouth and I would have a feel around to check his back teeth.

They did not seem overgrown, though they did feel very maligned, which I guessed had something to do with the large droppings he was passing, hence his digestive system was not making the best of what he was consuming.

Several people told me Fred’s life expectancy would be about a year/18 months, and to enjoy him whilst I still had him. From what I have been told by rabbit experts and books I have read, it is true to say that once there is a severe problem with the back teeth in rabbits, they are on borrowed time. I have been told of many people who decide to "call it a day" once a back tooth problem is discovered. I myself am not one to adopt this attitude. I think that pets are a larger responsibility that many people realise, and if you take them on, you have to take into account expensive vet bills and giving them the best possible care when they fall victim to illness and disease. Many pet insurance companies insure rabbits and other small animals, so if you keep several of them, it may be worth considering taking out insurance to cover your vet bills. Only healthy animals are insurable and they will have to undergo an examination by a veterinary surgeon to be deemed worthy. Any animal with a pre-existing condition cannot be insured.

In time, Fred continued to lose weight until it you could visibly see his backbone protruding. He also began to have episodes of passing a clear odourless jelly-like substance from his anus. This was sometimes accompanied by gastric bloat and he would sit hunched in a corner of his hutch grinding his teeth. Teeth grinding are a sign that a rabbit is in pain. I gave him buscopan to relieve the pain, a charcoal tablet and some gripe water. I found that giving him a pro-biotic called Avipro at the dose of ½ a scoop in a little water given every 2 hours helped stabilise him. A small amount of Imodium liquid at helped slow things down when he continued to spew the jelly-like substance from his anus. Care and judgement is needed when giving anti-dihorreah agents to rabbits, as you want to avoid stasis at all costs. Stasis is where the digestive system completely shuts down. The rabbit digestive tract is rather like a production line. Once something shuts down, everything else seems to as well. It is a ‘hindgut fermenter’ with a large caecum. Within the caecum lies a complex ecosystem of microorganisms which convert fibre to nutrients. The balance of microorganisms in the caecum is of paramount importance to the health of the rabbit. A healthy microflora digests food efficiently. One should note that when there is a gut problem such as Fred’s, where the intestinal tract could be inflamed as a result, and it is best to avoid Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as Metacam and Rimadyl as this can exacerbate the problem. Buscopan is much gentler for pain relief.

A year after Fred was first diagnosed, I knew that we were fighting a losing battle. He became thinner and thinner and the episodes of "mucoid enteritis" and gastric bloat seemed to become more and more frequent. Almost fourteen months to the day after he was first diagnosed, I decided that he had suffered enough. I made the appointment, which was to be his final visit to the vet. The vet agreed that it was for the best.

Hair was cut away from the edge of one of his ears to expose the vein at the edge. I held him whilst the needle went into the vein and the barbiturate sodium pentobarbitone was injected. It was all over in 2 seconds. At last he was at peace and free from suffering.

The dilemma I am now facing is what to do with his bonded cage-mate, Wendy.

We have a neutered buck, Miller, who belongs to my young daughter. It is obvious that Wendy is mourning Fred. I took her out of the hutch they shared and immediately put her into another one. I have a large run with a partition in the centre, which is how they were first introduced. When I tried taking the partition away, all hell broke loose and they flew at each other, taking out chunks of fur. I am determined to get them together, though it is early days yet. Rabbits are very territorial and are threatened by the smell of other rabbits. The steps I have taken so far is to switch their hutches. I put Wendy in Miller’s partly soiled hutch and vice versa, so they get used to each other’s smell.

The next step was to introduce them in the bathroom, where there was no smell whatsoever of other rabbits. I know that introducing adult rabbits can be tricky, but with care and patience, it can be successful. So far they can be left alone together in a place where there are no rabbits whatsoever, but for the moment it is only for short supervised periods of time.

Wendy was the one who "wore the trousers" when she lived with Fred, so it is now up to her to form a bond with her new partner. Wish her luck!

In concluding this story, I do not regret having had Fred. He was a lovely natured and intelligent bunny and though it was tragic, I learned a lot from his condition. I miss him, but I will try to remember the good times I had with him when he was healthy before his condition was diagnosed.

I have over the last 3 years studied rabbit health, I board a lot of rabbits and offer healthcare advice on them. If bunny owners have any queries, I would be glad to be of assistance. I can be e.mailed on: <a href="mailto:victoria@drvicnwo.wanadoo.co.uk">victoria@drvicnwo.wanadoo.co.uk</a>. <p>--Victoria Carey GBAR RVECP
